# Platform PKI

A Rust crate to provide a platform-agnostic support of PKI (authenticate with a certificate, smart card, YubiKey, ...)

## Import a test PKI

We provide a test PKI at `./test-pki/`, that PKI can be imported in your environment with the following commands:

For windows

```powershell
& .\examples\import_testpki_windows.ps1
```

For Linux (with SoftHSM2):

```shell
bash ./examples/init_softhsm2.sh
```

> [!NOTE]
> The files inside `test-pki` are generated by the script `misc/gen_test_pki.py`

## Test PKI support

We provide some example to test the PKI support:

- `examples/decode_cert_subject.rs`: Load a certificate either as a file or a reference to the credential store.
- `examples/decrypt_message.rs`: Decrypt a message using the private key of a referenced certificate.
- `examples/encrypt_message.rs`: Encrypt a message using the public key of referenced certificate.
- `examples/get_certificate_der.rs`: Get the certificate DER content either by a provided reference or using a selection dialog on Windows.
- `examples/list_certificate.rs`: List detected certificate (currently only support unix with PKCS11 support).
- `examples/sign_message.rs`: Sign a message using the private key of a referenced certificate.
- `examples/verify_message.rs`: Verify a message signature using the public key of a reference certificate
- `examples/list_trusted_roots.rs`: List trusted root found on system.
- `examples/verify_certificate.rs`: Check for a certificate trust

## Compile for web on a Windows/MacOS host

This crate depends on `ring`, however compiling this dependency for WASM can be cumbersome
on a Windows/MacOS host, as it requires to install a specific version of llvm with WebAssembly
support (see https://github.com/briansmith/ring/issues/1824).

To solve this issue this crate can be compiled in two ways:

- The standard one that include `ring`
- A mocked one that disables `ring` (hence making it trivial to compile). It can be enabled by
  setting the `libparsec_platform_pki_disable_ring_dep_and_stub_apis` cfg option.

Note using `libparsec_platform_pki_disable_ring_dep_and_stub_apis` means `libparsec_platform_pki` should only be used
with the testbed (which itself does it own mock of the functions exposed by `libparsec_platform_pki`)
as obviously all  function exposed by `libparsec_platform_pki` are`libparsec_platform_pki` are
stubbed and hence will panic at runtime when called.

### Example

Compiling with ring support:

```shell
cargo build -p libparsec_platform_pki
```

Compiling on MacOs/Windows to generate the web bindings.

```shell
RUSTFLAGS='--cfg libparsec_platform_pki_disable_ring_dep_and_stub_apis' cargo build -p libparsec_platform_pki
```

Notes:

- There is nothing to do to have the correct implementation that release should use ;-)
- You should never need to use this `libparsec_platform_pki_disable_ring_dep_and_stub_apis` by hand:
  instead it is used by the `make.py` script which is already responsible to
  do libparsec compilation with the correct flags.

### Why not using features instead of cfg ?

Features are supposed to be additive, while we want to switch between two
implementations.

Features must be explicitly enabled, however here we have one case that should
be used for the vast majority of the cases and a weird corner case that should
under no circumstances end up being used in production !

So using a feature would require more configuration in multiple places, and may
lead to the wrong implementation being used by mistake while being hard to
detect (this has already happened when generating test data !).
