packaging/windows/README.md, before:

# NSIS installer for Parsec

Inspired by [Deluge NSIS installer](https://github.com/deluge-torrent/deluge/blob/3f9ae337932da550f2623daa6dedd9c3e0e5cfb3/packaging/win32/Win32%20README.txt)

## 1 - Build the application

Run the `freeze_program.py` Python script with the path to the Parsec sources to use:

```shell
$ python freeze_program.py ../..
```

Note the Python version embedded inside the build will be taken from the interpreter
you run the script with.

On top of the build, the script will generate `install_files.nsh`, `uninstall_files.nsh`
and `manifest.ini` files that will be used by the packaging nsis script.
It will also download a WinFSP installer which is also needed by the packaging nsis script.

## 2 - Package and sign the application

### 2.1 - Install signtool & Nsis

The `signtool` command is [part of the Windows SDK](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/downloads/windows-10-sdk/)

The `NSIS` install packager is [available on SourceForge](https://sourceforge.net/projects/nsis/)
(SourceForge ? Now, that's a name I haven't heard in a long time...)

The `signtool` and `makensis` command must be added to the $PATH:

Can be done for example doing

```shell
set PATH=C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\bin\$VERSION\x64;%PATH%
set PATH=C:\Program Files (x86)\NSIS;%PATH%
```

### 2.2 - The simple way

Run the `make_installer.py` Pythons script:

```shell
python make_installer.py --sign-mode exe
```

This will generate a `build\parsec-<version>-<platform>-setup.exe` installer.

### 2.3 - The advanced way

Under the hood, `make_installer.py` does 3 things:

- Sign the `parsec.exe` in the application distribution
- Generate an installer from the application distribution
- Sign the installer

The signature are done with a command of the type:

```shell
signtool sign /n Scille /t http://time.certum.pl /fd sha256 /d "Parsec by Scille" /v $EXECUTABLE
```

And the NSIS script is run by doing:

```shell
"C:\Program Files (x86)\NSIS\makensis.exe" installer.nsi
```

Commit message:

Updated NSIS & freeze_program scripts to bundle overlays dlls

packaging/windows/README.md, after:

# NSIS installer for Parsec

Inspired by [Deluge NSIS installer](https://github.com/deluge-torrent/deluge/blob/3f9ae337932da550f2623daa6dedd9c3e0e5cfb3/packaging/win32/Win32%20README.txt)

## 1 - Build the application

Build shell extensions that are needed to display icon overlays in windows explorer.
Make sure you have the windows SDK installed on your local machine (if not install it using the
Visual Studio installer). You can use `Visual Studio` to build these two dlls __in `Release` mode__
or invoke `msbuild` from the command line (you have to manually add `msbuild` to your `PATH`).

```shell
$ msbuild -maxCpuCount -property:Configuration=Release .\windows-icon-handler\check-icon-handler\check-icon-handler.vcxproj
$ msbuild -maxCpuCount -property:Configuration=Release .\windows-icon-handler\refresh-icon-handler\refresh-icon-handler.vcxproj
```

Run the `freeze_program.py` Python script with the path to the Parsec sources to use:

```shell
$ python freeze_program.py ../..
```

Note the Python version embedded inside the build will be taken from the interpreter
you run the script with.

On top of the build, the script will generate `install_files.nsh`, `uninstall_files.nsh`
and `manifest.ini` files that will be used by the packaging nsis script.
It will also download a WinFSP installer which is also needed by the packaging nsis script.

## 2 - Package and sign the application

### 2.1 - Install signtool & Nsis

The `signtool` command is [part of the Windows SDK](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/downloads/windows-10-sdk/)

The `NSIS` install packager is [available on SourceForge](https://sourceforge.net/projects/nsis/)
(SourceForge ? Now, that's a name I haven't heard in a long time...)

The `signtool` and `makensis` command must be added to the $PATH:

Can be done for example doing

```shell
set PATH=C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\bin\$VERSION\x64;%PATH%
set PATH=C:\Program Files (x86)\NSIS;%PATH%
```

### 2.2 - The simple way

Run the `make_installer.py` Pythons script:

```shell
python make_installer.py --sign-mode exe
```

This will generate a `build\parsec-<version>-<platform>-setup.exe` installer.

### 2.3 - The advanced way

Under the hood, `make_installer.py` does 3 things:

- Sign the `parsec.exe` in the application distribution
- Generate an installer from the application distribution
- Sign the installer

The signature are done with a command of the type:

```shell
signtool sign /n Scille /t http://time.certum.pl /fd sha256 /d "Parsec by Scille" /v $EXECUTABLE
```

And the NSIS script is run by doing:

```shell
"C:\Program Files (x86)\NSIS\makensis.exe" installer.nsi
```
