<!-- Parsec Cloud (https://parsec.cloud) Copyright (c) BUSL-1.1 2016-present Scille SAS -->

# How to add a type with its python bindings

## Quick introduction

Libparsec defines its most common types in the `libparsec_types` crate.

See [`libparsec_types` crate's README](../../libparsec/crates/types/README.md) for more info.

In summary, to add or update a type:

1. Define it in the `libparsec/crates/types`
2. Implement (or derive):
   - `Debug`
   - `Copy` (Optional)
   - `Clone`
   - `PartialEq`
   - `Eq`
3. Not all types need serialization (e.g. `SASCode`), if yours does implement `Serialize`/`Deserialize`
   (typically using serde_as) and `Hash` (needed by the testbed).
4. Most types don't need to implement `FromStr`/`ToString`, especially if they implement `Serialize`/`Deserialize`
   (notable exception being the `new_string_based_id_type!` macro). This is because we'd rather being explicit
   about the serialization format and conversion from string might be also needed for different use (e.g.
   `HumanHandle` is serialized as a tuple, but also implement `FromStr` to parse `John <john@example.com>`
   format which is convenient for the tests).
5. Use `#[serde(rename_all = "SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE")]` for enums.
6. Add it in `server/src/lib.rs` to make it visible to python.
7. Expose it in `server/src/` using a macro starting with `gen_py_wrapper_class` depending on your use case
8. Define the python class typing in `server/parsec/_parsec_pyi/` (note that the `protocol` folder contains
   autogenerated typing). The file name should be the same as the one you edited in `server/src/` (except for the extension)
