.. Parsec Cloud (https://parsec.cloud) Copyright (c) BUSL-1.1 2016-present Scille SAS

.. cspell:words conninfo literalinclude linenos

.. _doc_hosting_deployment:

.. role:: bash(code)
  :language: bash

.. role:: yaml(code)
  :language: yaml

=================
Server Deployment
=================

This section covers how to deploy the Parsec server.

.. _Parsec: https://parsec.cloud

Requirements
************

- `Docker`_ and the `docker-compose`_ plugin.
- :ref:`Parsec client <doc_userguide_install_parsec>`.
- :ref:`Parsec CLI <doc_hosting_install_cli>`.

.. _Docker: https://www.docker.com
.. _docker-compose: https://docs.docker.com/compose/

Preamble
********

The `Parsec`_ server depends on the following external components in order to work properly:

- A `PostgreSQL`_ database to store the metadata.
- An `S3 object storage`_ to store the data blocks.

  .. note::

    The `Parsec`_ server need access to an ``S3 object storage``-like service, not necessarily ``AWS S3``

- An `SMTP server`_ for sending emails.
- A `TSL/SSL server certificate`_ for ``HTTPS`` communication with the clients.
- (Optional) A `Sentry DSN` for telemetry report.

.. _PostgreSQL: https://www.postgresql.org/
.. _S3 object storage: https://aws.amazon.com/s3/
.. _SMTP server: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_Mail_Transfer_Protocol
.. _TSL/SSL server certificate: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_key_certificate#TLS/SSL_server_certificate
.. _Sentry DSN: https://docs.sentry.io/product/sentry-basics/concepts/dsn-explainer/

.. warning::

  For security reasons, the installation of these components is outside the scope of this guide.
  In order to securely configure and manage them, please refer to their official documentations.

  This guide provides instructions for quickly settings up mock-ups or basic installs of those components.
  Keep in mind that these instructions are provided for convenience and **should not be used in production**.

Parsec testing infra
********************

.. _with-docker:

With Docker
===========

.. _gen-tls-certs:

Generating the required TLS certificates
----------------------------------------

For this guide, the required TLS certificates will be generated with a custom Certificate Authority (CA) created for this purpose.

.. literalinclude:: setup-tls.sh
  :language: bash
  :linenos:

The script will:

1. Generate the CA key & self-signed certificate (``custom-ca.{key,crt}``).
2. For ``parsec-s3`` and ``parsec-server`` services:

   a. Generate the service key & Certificate Signing Request (CSR) ``parsec-{service}.{key,csr}``.
   b. Generate the certificate using the CSR and the CA.

3. For the service ``parsec-server``:

   a. Change the group id of the key file to ``1234`` (That is the GID used by the ``parsec-server`` container).
   b. Change the file mode to give read permission to the group ``1234``.

   .. note::

      This is required because ``docker-compose`` does not allow to mount the file with the correct
      permissions in the container.

.. warning::

  For production, you should use certificates issued from a trusted CA

The env files
-------------

We split the configuration of the parsec server into multiple env files so it's simpler to understand how to configure each part.

The administration token
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To be able to perform admin tasks (like creating an organization) on the server, an administration token is required.
Below you will find a simple script to generate a token:

.. literalinclude:: gen-admin-token.sh
  :language: shell
  :linenos:

The script will generate a random token (:bash:`openssl rand -hex 32`) and create the env file ``parsec-admin-token.env``

.. note::

  The step :bash:`TOKEN=$(openssl rand -hex 32)` could also be replaced by a value generated by a password-generator for example.

  The token doesn't have to be a valid hexadecimal value: any string with enough entropy can be used.

  On top of the administration token, ``gen-admin-token.sh`` also generates `FAKE_ACCOUNT_PASSWORD_ALGORITHM_SEED` which
  is a secret used to make unpredictable the password algorithm configuration returned for non-existing accounts.

Database configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create the file ``parsec-db.env`` with the following content to configure the access to the PostgreSQL database:

.. literalinclude:: parsec-db.env
  :language: ini
  :linenos:

SMTP configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create the file ``parsec-smtp.env`` to configure the access to the SMTP server (``mailhog`` in this case).

We need to set the connection information, the sender information, the default language the emails are sent in:

.. literalinclude:: parsec-smtp.env
  :language: ini
  :linenos:

S3 service configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create the file ``parsec-s3.env`` with the following content to set the URL for the S3-like service:

.. literalinclude:: parsec-s3.env
  :language: ini
  :linenos:

.. note::

   We need to escape the ``:`` with a ``\`` when specifying the port of the service.

Parsec server configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create the file ``parsec.env`` with the following content to configure the ``parsec-server`` service:

.. literalinclude:: parsec.env
  :language: ini
  :linenos:

.. note::

  To see the full list of environment variables that you can use to configure Parsec, you can run:

  .. code-block:: bash

    python -m parsec run --help

  Look for the sections ``[env var: VARIABLE]`` next to each configuration option. For example:

  .. code-block:: bash

    --administration-token TOKEN    Secret token to access the Administration API
                                    [env var: PARSEC_ADMINISTRATION_TOKEN; required]

.. _the-docker-compose-file:

The docker-compose file
-----------------------

You can use the following `docker-compose`_ file (``parsec-server.docker.yaml``) to deploy the Parsec server for testing:

.. literalinclude:: parsec-server.docker.yaml
  :language: yaml
  :linenos:

It will setup 4 services:

+---------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Service name        | Description                                                                 |
+=====================+=============================================================================+
| ``parsec-postgres`` | The PostgreSQL database                                                     |
+---------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``parsec-s3``       | The Object Storage service                                                  |
+---------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``parsec-smtp``     | A mock SMTP server                                                          |
+---------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``parsec-server``   | The Parsec server                                                           |
+---------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``parsec-proxy``    | A Nginx proxy server, used as an example to configure a reverse proxy.      |
|                     |                                                                             |
|                     | Learn more about :ref:`using parsec behind a reverse proxy<behind_a_proxy>` |
+---------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Starting the services
---------------------

The docker containers can be started as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

  docker compose -f parsec-server.docker.yaml up

Initial configuration
---------------------

On the first start, a one-time configuration is required for the database and s3 services.

Applying the database migration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

(optional) Check that the database is accessible with:

.. code-block:: bash

  set -a
  source parsec-db.env
  docker exec -t parsec-postgres psql 'postgresql://DB_USER:DB_PASS@0.0.0.0:5432/parsec' -c "\conninfo"

.. note::

  You should have something like display on your console:

  .. code-block::

    You are connected to database "parsec" as user "parsec" on host "0.0.0.0" at port "5432".

To bootstrap the database we just need to apply the migrations with:

.. code-block:: bash

  docker compose -f parsec-server.docker.yaml run parsec-server migrate

Create the S3 Bucket
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Access the console at https://127.0.0.1:9090, you will need to use the credential specified in the ``docker-compose`` file at :yaml:`services.parsec-s3.environment.MINIO_ROOT_{USER,PASSWORD}`.

Go to https://127.0.0.1:9090/buckets/add-bucket to create a new bucket named ``parsec`` with the features ``object locking`` toggled on.

After that you will need to restart the ``parsec-server`` (that likely exited because it wasn't able to access the S3 bucket):

.. code-block:: bash

  docker compose -f parsec-server.docker.yaml restart parsec-server

Test the SMTP configuration & server
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can test ``mailhog`` with:

.. literalinclude:: ping-mailhog.sh
  :language: bash
  :linenos:

You can then check if the email is present in the web interface at http://127.0.0.1:8025

On Bare Metal
=============

If you don't want to install Parsec server via Docker, you can install it on bare metal.

Requirements
------------

- Python v3.12 with ``pip`` and ``venv`` modules
- A S3 like object storage endpoint.
- A postgres-16 database endpoint.
- A TLS certificate & key for the server.

Configure the environment
-------------------------

1. Configure the env files, follow `the env files`_.

Installation
------------

1. Set up a virtual env:

  .. code-block:: bash

    python -m venv venv

2. Configure your shell to use the virtual env:

  .. code-block:: bash

    source venv/bin/activate

3. Install ``parsec-server``

  The ``parsec-server`` is available as a python package hosted on https://pypi.org/project/parsec-cloud/.

  You need to install it with the extra ``backend`` enabled.

  .. code-block:: bash

    python -m pip install 'parsec-cloud==3.7.0-rc.2'

4. Prepare the database by applying the migrations:

  .. code-block:: bash

    source venv/bin/activate
    set -a
    source parsec-db.env
    python -m parsec migrate

Start the server
----------------

1. Create a wrapper script ``run-parsec-server``

  .. code-block:: bash

    # Load the virtualenv.
    source venv/bin/activate

    # Load the env file into the environment table.
    set -a
    source parsec-admin-token.env
    source parsec-db.env
    source parsec-smtp.env
    source parsec-s3.env
    source parsec.env
    set +a

    # Start the parsec server.
    python -m parsec run

2. Execute the wrapper script ``run-parsec-server``

  .. note::

    To run the wrapper with only ``run-parsec-server`` you need to have set the executable mode on the script file (``chmod +x run-parsec-server``).
    Otherwise, you need to execute it with the ``bash`` shell (``bash run-parsec-server``).


Start using Parsec server
*************************

Create the first organization
=============================

.. code-block:: bash

  set -a
  source parsec-admin-token.env
  export SSL_CAFILE=$PWD/custom-ca.crt
  parsec-cli organization create --addr parsec3://127.0.0.1:6777 <orgname>

.. note::

   Change ``<orgname>`` to the organization's name that suit you.

Save the link after ``Bootstrap organization url:`` you will need it to create the first user (owner) of the organization.

Add the first user to the organization
======================================

First, start ``parsec`` with the custom CA:

.. code-block:: bash

  export SSL_CAFILE=$PWD/custom-ca.crt
  parsec

After that go to ``Menu``/``Join an organization`` (or ``CTRL+O``) and paste the link from before (should already be filled in the text field). Follow the instructions to create the first user of the organization.

.. _behind_a_proxy:

Running behind a reverse proxy
******************************

To run Parsec behind a reverse proxy you will need to add the option ``--proxy-trusted-address`` or set the environment variable ``PARSEC_PROXY_TRUSTED_ADDRESS`` to the address of the reverse proxy (e.g.: ``localhost``).

If this option is not set, the gunicorn/uvicorn ``FORWARDED_ALLOW_IPS`` environment variable is used, defaulting to trusting only localhost if absent.

.. tip::

  You can provide multiple addresses by separating them with a comma.

  Example: Use the option ``--proxy-trusted-address '::1,10.0.0.42'`` will trust the address ``::1`` and ``10.0.0.42``

An example of a reverse proxy configuration for ``nginx`` can be found in :ref:`the docker compose file <the-docker-compose-file>`:

.. literalinclude:: parsec-server.docker.yaml
  :language: yaml
  :linenos:
  :start-at: parsec-proxy
  :end-before: parsec-postgres

The provided configuration for ``nginx`` is:

.. literalinclude:: parsec-nginx.conf
  :language: nginx
  :emphasize-lines: 10,19-22,25,28
  :linenos:

It configures Nginx to serve the domain ``example.com`` by listening on port 80 and 443, and proxy the requests to the Parsec server.

The important takeaways are:

- Set the headers ``X-Forwarded-For``, ``X-Forwarded-Proto``, ``X-Forwarded-Host`` and ``X-Forwarded-Port``.

  .. note::
    Currently, Parsec only uses the ``X-Forwarded-For`` and ``X-Forwarded-Proto`` headers.
    But it better to overwrite all of them to avoid any issue.

- Remove the header ``Forwarded``.

  .. note::
    The ``Forwarded`` header (`RFC-7239 <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7239>`_) is not used by Parsec, but it may be in the future.

- Set the header ``host`` to the accessible address. Here we force the value to be ``example.com``, but you can set it to ``$host`` like for ``X-Forwarded-Host``.

TLS Recommendation
******************

We recommend that connections to the service are made using a TLS layer.
If you are using a :ref:`reverse proxy<behind_a_proxy>` refer to it's documentation on how to configure TLS:

- `Nginx SSL module configuration <https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_ssl_module.html>`_
- `Apache httpd SSL Howto <https://httpd.apache.org/docs/current/en/ssl/ssl_howto.html>`__
- `Traefik TLS configuration <https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/https/tls>`__

Or if you do not use a reverse proxy, see how to configure :ref:`TLS on the server <server-tls-config>`

.. _server-tls-config:

TLS Server configuration
************************

We recommend that when user directly connects to the server (i.e. without using a :ref:`reverse proxy<behind_a_proxy>`)
to configure the TLS settings on the server.

We provide 3 options to configure the TLS connection:

.. cspell: ignore Recommandations, sécurité

- ``--ssl-keyfile [env var: PARSEC_SSL_KEYFILE]``: The TLS key file
- ``--ssl-certfile [env var: PARSEC_SSL_CERTFILE]``: The TLS certificate file
- ``--ssl-ciphers [env var: PARSEC_SSL_CIPHERS]``: A list of ciphers that can be used when the client & server negotiate which algorithm to use when doing the TLS handcheck

  .. note::

    You are not required to provide the ciphers list as we use a default list that was recommended by the `French Cybersecurity Agency (ANSSI) <https://cyber.gouv.fr/en>`__ in `Recommandations de sécurité relatives à TLS <anssi-reco-tls_>`_

.. _anssi-reco-tls: https://cyber.gouv.fr/sites/default/files/2017/07/anssi-guide-recommandations_de_securite_relatives_a_tls-v1.2.pdf

.. hint::

   If you followed the installation :ref:`using docker <with-docker>`,
   you should only have to replace the file ``parsec-server.crt`` and ``parsec-server.key`` that where generated during `Generating the required TLS certificates`_.
   The env variable ``PARSEC_SSL_KEYFILE`` and ``PARSEC_SSL_CERTFILE`` are already configured in ``parsec.env`` that was defined in `Parsec server configuration`_.
